Form object patterns in Rails: Stop creating services for everything with YAAF - article (#202)
rootstrap/blog: content/Stop creating services for everything - Knowing YAAF & the FormObject Pattern.md

> ![YAAF](images/Yaaf-Blog-cover.png)

Reviewer: Can we make this image a link to the github?

> # Stop creating services for everything - Knowing YAAF & the FormObject Pattern

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# Stop creating services for everything - Using YAAF & the FormObject Pattern
```

  def index
    @posts = Post.all
  end

  def create
    ActiveRecord::Base.transaction do
      @post = Post.new(post_params)
      @post.tags = params[:tags].map do |tag|
        tag[:id].present? ? Tag.find(tag[:id]) : Tag.find_or_create_by(name: tag[:name])
      end
      if params[:category_name].present?
        category = Category.create!(name: params[:category_name])
        @post.category = category
      end
      @post.save!
    end
  end

  def post_params
    params.require(:post).permit(:title, :body, :publisher_id, :category_id)
  end
end
```

It looks terrible, doesn't it? Maybe our first thinking about that piece of code is to make a refactoring moving the creation of the post to a service named `PostCreationService`, which could be useful and it might be used in the future in another part of the system. But... what have we said about _reinventing the wheel_?

Using **YAAF** we should create a new `PostForm` class that is going to encapsulate all the logic of post creation and related models inside it. And is very simple to implement it! Look at this code:
```ruby
# app/forms/registration_form.rb

class PostForm < ApplicationForm

>   attr_accessor :post_form_params

Reviewer: We should expand the attribute in here instead of having a hash:
```suggestion
  attr_accessor :post, :category_name, :tags
```

Reviewer: BTW, shouldn't we define the actual form fields here? 

```suggestion
  attr_accessor :title, :body, ...
```

  def initialize(args = {})

>     @post_form_params = args

Reviewer: And then here we should call `super(args)` to leverage the automatic attribute assignment from ActiveModel. This will populate the instance variables using the accessors defined previously.

    @models = [post, category, tags].flatten.compact
  end

  def post

>     @post ||= Post.new(post_form_params[:post])

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    @post ||= Post.new(post_form_params[:post], category: category)
```

  end

  def category
    return [] if post_form_params[:category_name].blank?

>     post.category = Category.find_or_initialize_by(name: post_form_params[:category_name])
>     post.category

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    @category ||= Category.find_or_initialize_by(name: post_form_params[:category_name])
```

  end

  def tags
    return [] if post_form_params[:tags].blank?

>     post.tags = post_form_params[:tags].map do |tag|
>       tag[:id].present? ? Tag.find(tag[:id]) : Tag.find_or_initialize_by(name: tag[:name])
>     end
>     post.tags

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    @tags ||= post_form_params[:tags].map do |tag|
      tag[:id].present? ? Tag.find(tag[:id]) : Tag.find_or_initialize_by(name: tag[:name])
    end
```

Note: This code change comes in combination with the code changes above (also test that it actually works 😂)

  end
end
```

And then in our controller

```ruby
class Api::V1::PostsController < Api::V1::ApiController
  def index
    @posts = Post.all
  end

  def create
    form = PostForm.new(post_form_params)

>     form.save!
>     @post = form.post

Reviewer 2: another option if we want to handle errors
```suggestion
    if form.save
      @post = form.post
    else
      render :new
    end
```

  end

  private

  def post_form_params
    params.permit(:category_name, tags: %i[id name], post: %i[title body publisher_id category_id])
  end
end
```

**Tip:** Having an `ApplicationForm` which inherits from `YAAF::Form` is a good practice.

That's it, now we have a `PostForm` which encapsulates all the persistency logic of post/tags/categories, leaving our controller and models clean and the code is easy to follow.

Another good thing is that **YAAF** provides a similar API to `ActiveModel` models so you can treat them interchangeably.

## Why not a Service or PORO's?

- **Make customized Services or PORO's could be disorganized** if you're working in a team.
- YAAF helps you to apply the **Form Pattern** in an easy way.
- YAAF is only **64 lines long**.

> - Is **well tested and maintained**.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- It's **well tested and maintained**.
```

- It helps you keep your models, views and controllers thin by providing a better place where to put business logic. In the end, this will **improve the quality of your codebase and make it easier to maintain and extend**.
- And a lot **[more](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**.

## Summary

> Well if you come along this way I hope this article helps you to integrate **YAAF** in your project and start using the `FormObject` Pattern to make your code even better, you can see more examples **[here](https://yaaf-examples.herokuapp.com/)**. **YAAF** is open-source and is open to receive new contributions so check it out!

Reviewer: It'd be better to link to the github instead of the example app I think. There are more examples and explanations in the readme than in the demo app.

[![YAAF](images/Yaaf-Blog-cover.png)](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)

# Form object patterns in Rails: Stop creating services for everything with YAAF

## Working with large controllers

> How many times have you encountered with large controller methods? If you are _lucky_ like me, probably many times.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
How many times have you encountered large controller methods? If you are _lucky_ like me, probably many times.
```

One of the most common practices to start refactoring a long controller is to move the code to a service.

> Services are great.  If we code them in an atomic way, they will be easy to test and understand. But the problem is when we use the services like a _Swiss Army knife_.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Services are great, and if we code them in an atomic way, they will be easy to test and understand. But the problem is when we use the services it's like using a _Swiss Army knife_.
```

> >-"Hey, I don't know how properly refactor this piece of code"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>-"Hey, I don't know how to properly refactor this piece of code"
```

> >-"Dude, do a new service"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
>-"Dude, just do a new service"
```

> **But no!** Making a new service is not always the best option. In some cases, we are _reinventing the wheel_ and maybe there is a pattern that already fits with our needs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**But no!**, making a new service is not always the best option. In some cases, we are _reinventing the wheel_ and maybe there is a pattern that already fits with our needs.
```

> So here comes **YAAF** (Yet Another Active Form) to save our day. **YAAF** is a gem that lets you create form objects in an easy and friendly Rails way. It makes use of `ActiveRecord` and `ActiveModel` features in order to provide you with a form object that behaves pretty much like a Rails model and still be completely configurable.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So here comes **YAAF** (Yet Another Active Form) to save our day. **YAAF** is a gem that lets you create form objects using Rails in an easy and friendly way. It makes use of `ActiveRecord` and `ActiveModel` features to provide you with a form object that behaves like a Rails model and is still completely configurable.
```

## When to use YAAF?

> Let's think that we have an API endpoint that saves a new post on our database. A post has a title, body, publisher, and could have tags and a category.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Let's imagine that we have an API endpoint that saves a new post on our database. A post has a title, body, publisher, and could also have tags and a category.
```

> Tags and categories could be created at the moment that the publisher sends the post. (If our inputs don't find the correct tag or category, they will let the user write the name of a new one).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Tags and categories can be created as soon as the publisher sends the post. (If our inputs don't find the correct tag or category, they will let the user write the name of a new one).
```

> So in our controller, in the worst-case scenario, we could have something like this:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
So, in the worst-case scenario, our controller could have something like this:
```

```ruby
class Api::V1::PostsController < Api::V1::ApiController
  def index
    @posts = Post.all
  end

  def create
    ActiveRecord::Base.transaction do
      @post = Post.new(post_params)
      @post.tags = params[:tags].map do |tag|
        tag[:id].present? ? Tag.find(tag[:id]) : Tag.find_or_create_by(name: tag[:name])
      end
      if params[:category_name].present?
        category = Category.create!(name: params[:category_name])
        @post.category = category
      end
      @post.save!
    end
  end

  def post_params
    params.require(:post).permit(:title, :body, :publisher_id, :category_id)
  end
end
```

> It looks terrible, doesn't it? Maybe our first thinking about that piece of code is to make a refactoring moving the creation of the post to a service named `PostCreationService`, which could be useful and it might be used in the future in another part of the system. But... what have we said about _reinventing the wheel_?

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It looks terrible, right? Maybe our first thinking about that piece of code is to make a refactoring which moves the creation of the post to a service named `PostCreationService`. This could be useful and might be used in the future in another part of the system. But... what have we said about _reinventing the wheel_?
```

> Using **YAAF** we should create a new `PostForm` class that is going to encapsulate all the logic of post creation and related models inside it. And is very simple to implement it! Look at this code:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
When using **YAAF**, we should create a new `PostForm` class that is going to encapsulate all the logic of post creation and related models inside it. And it is very simple to implement it! Just look at this code:
```

```ruby
# app/forms/registration_form.rb

class PostForm < ApplicationForm
  attr_accessor :post_form_params
  validate :amount_of_tags

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And then here, we should call **super(args)** to leverage the automatic attribute assignment from ActiveModel. This will populate the instance variables using the accessors defined previously.
```

  def initialize(args = {})
    @post_form_params = args
    @models = [post, category, tags].flatten.compact
  end

  def post
    @post ||= Post.new(post_form_params[:post]).tap do |post|
      post.category = category
      post.tags = tags
    end
  end

  def category
    return [] if post_form_params[:category_name].blank?

    @category ||= Category.find_or_initialize_by(name: post_form_params[:category_name])
  end

  def tags
    return [] if post_form_params[:tags].blank?

    @tags ||= post_form_params[:tags].map do |tag|
      tag[:id].present? ? Tag.find(tag[:id]) : Tag.find_or_initialize_by(name: tag[:name])
    end
  end

  private

  def amount_of_tags
    return if tags.size.between?(1, 3)

    errors.add(:base, "You can't assign more than three tags to a post")
  end
end
```

> **Note:** We have also added a custom validation named `amount_of_tags`, YAAF help us to encapsulate business rules in our Form Object.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note:** We have also added a custom validation named `amount_of_tags`, YAAF helps us to encapsulate business rules in our Form Object.
```

> And then in our controller

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And then in our controller, we have the following:
```

> And then in our controller, we have the following:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
And then, in our controller, we have the following:
```

```ruby
class Api::V1::PostsController < Api::V1::ApiController
  def index
    @posts = Post.all
  end

  def create
    form = PostForm.new(post_form_params)
    form.save!
    @post = form.post
  end

  private

  def post_form_params
    params.permit(:category_name, tags: %i[id name], post: %i[title body publisher_id category_id])
  end
end
```

**Tip:** Having an `ApplicationForm` which inherits from `YAAF::Form` is a good practice.

> That's it, now we have a `PostForm` which encapsulates all the persistency logic of post/tags/categories, leaving our controller and models clean and the code is easy to follow.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That's it, now we have a `PostForm` which encapsulates all the persistency logic of post/tags/categories, leaving our controller and models clean, with an easy to follow code.

Another good thing is that **YAAF** provides a similar API to `ActiveModel` models so you can treat them interchangeably.

## Why not a Service or PORO's?

> - **Make customized Services or PORO's could be disorganized** if you're working in a team.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Making customized Services or PORO's could be disorganized** if you're working in a team.
```

> Another good thing is that **YAAF** provides a similar API to `ActiveModel` models so you can treat them interchangeably.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another good thing is that **YAAF** provides a similar API to `ActiveModel` models, so you can treat them interchangeably.
```

- YAAF helps you to apply the **Form Pattern** in an easy way.
- YAAF is only **64 lines long**.
- It's **well tested and maintained**.

> - It helps you keep your models, views and controllers thin by providing a better place where to put business logic. In the end, this will **improve the quality of your codebase and make it easier to maintain and extend**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- It helps you keep your models, views, and controllers thin by providing a better place to put business logic. In the end, this will **improve the quality of your codebase and make it easier to maintain and extend**.
```

- And a lot **[more](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**.

## Summary

> Well, if you come along this way I hope this article helps you to integrate **YAAF** in your project and start using the `FormObject` Pattern to make your code even better. You can see more examples **[here](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**. **YAAF** is open-source and is open to receive new contributions, so check it out!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Well, if you've got this far, I hope this article helps you to integrate **YAAF** in your project and also use the  `FormObject` Pattern to make your code even better. You can see more examples **[here](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**. **YAAF** is open-source that is open to receive new contributions. So check it out and see what you think!
```

  def create
    form = PostForm.new(post_form_params)
    form.save!
    @post = form.post
  end

  private

  def post_form_params
    params.permit(:category_name, tags: %i[id name], post: %i[title body publisher_id category_id])
  end
end
```

**Tip:** Having an `ApplicationForm` which inherits from `YAAF::Form` is a good practice.

That's it, now we have a `PostForm` which encapsulates all the persistency logic of post/tags/categories, leaving our controller and models clean, with an easy to follow code. 

Another good thing is that **YAAF** provides a similar API to `ActiveModel` models, so you can treat them interchangeably.

## Why not a Service or PORO's?

- **Making customized Services or PORO's could be disorganized** if you're working in a team.
- YAAF helps you to apply the **Form Pattern** in an easy way.
- YAAF is only **64 lines long**.
- It's **well tested and maintained**.
- It helps you keep your models, views, and controllers thin by providing a better place to put business logic. In the end, this will **improve the quality of your codebase and make it easier to maintain and extend**.
- And a lot **[more](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**.

## Summary

> Well, if you've got this far, I hope this article helps you to integrate **YAAF** in your project, while also helping you use the  `FormObject` Pattern to make your code even better. You can see more examples **[here](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**. **YAAF** is open-source and is open to receive new contributions. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Well, if you've got this far, I hope this article helps you to integrate **YAAF** in your project, while also helping you use the `FormObject` Pattern to make your code even better. You can see more examples **[here](https://github.com/rootstrap/yaaf)**. **YAAF** is open-source and is open to receive new contributions. 
```
